www.oliveboard.in
Lesson 2: Operating System
What is Operating System: An Operating System (OS) is a collection of software that manages software and
hardware resources and provides services to computer programs and manages the resources (CPU, Main memory,
Secondary storage and I/O devices) of computer. It is a software that acts as an interface between computer
hardware and a user.

Type of Operating System OS: Some of the widely used operating System types are mentioned below:
1. Batch processing operating System: In Batch OS, user doesn’t interact with OS directly. Users submit their
jobs and an operator groups these jobs into batches. Jobs with similar requirements are grouped in the same batch
and then these batches are processed by the processor one by one.

2. Multi-programming operating System: In this OS, more than one process can be processed by the processor
simultaneously. The Scheduler decides which process to run by the processor and this process is known as CPU
scheduling. The process of switching from one job to other job is known as Context Switching.
* The main focus is to maximize the processor (CPU) usage.

3. Multi-tasking operating System: Multi-tasking also known as Time Sharing Operating system is a logical
extension of Multi-programming operating system. It allows users to share the resources simultaneously and in this,
context switching is performed along with time sharing. The main focus is to minimize the response time.

4. Multi-processing operating System: In multi-processing OS, more than one processor (CPUs) can be used
within a single computer system.

www.oliveboard.in

www.oliveboard.in

5. Network operating System: Network OS allows users to share resources available on their computer to other
users and access resources available on other’s computer.
a) Peer – to – peer: In peer – to – peer, all workstations are considered equal and have same privilege to use the
resources available on the network.

b) Client/server: In Client/server operating system, all functions and applications are centralized to single dedicated
system called Server. All other systems (known as Clients) are connected to the dedicated system.

6. Distributed operating System: In Distributed operating system, various independent systems are connected
with each other using a shared communication network but physically separated where they have their own processor
and memory. A system can always access the resources that are not available on their system but on other system in
the network. This type of OS is an advancement of Network operating system and also known as Loosely Coupled
System.

7. Real Time operating System: Real time operating system (RTOS) are used in applications where the result is
guaranteed in specified time constraint. These are very fast and quick in response and used in applications where
large events are to be executed in a short time.
•

Hard real time OS: In Hard real time OS, the process should be executed within specified time and it can’t
miss its deadline. Missing the deadline can cause disasters consequences and system will fail. Ex: Anti – lock
brakes, Flight control system.

•

Soft real time OS: In Soft real time OS, it is not mandatory that an execution must be finished in the
specified time every time. Ex: Digital camera, telephone switches.

Components of OS: All the user software programs can’t directly access the computer hardware; they need to go
through OS to access the hardware. Various components of operating system are:
1. Kernel: Kernel is a central component in the computer’s OS. It is a computer program that has complete control
over everything of computer system. It is the first program after boot loader that loaded, and its critical code is

www.oliveboard.in

www.oliveboard.in
loaded in the protected area of the memory called Kernel Space while other application programs are loaded in
separate area of memory called User space.
Kernel is a low-level abstraction layer of OS, user uses System calls to interact with the system, system call invokes
the kernel and then kernel perform the user’s operation.

Based on their design and functions, Kernel is divided mainly into three parts:
•

Monolithic Kernel: A monolithic kernel performs all the OS instructions in the same address space and
hence increases the speed.

•

Micro Kernel: A microkernel runs mostly all the processes in User space and hence increases the Modularity.

•

Hybrid Kernel: A hybrid kernel is an extension of Micro kernel with some added functionality of Monolithic
kernel.

2. Interrupts: An interrupt is an input signal that indicates an event and need the immediate attention of the
processor. When an interrupt occurs and request is accepted, the processor halt the current execution immediately
and executes a function called Interrupt handler. After the interrupt handler finishes its activities, the processor
resumes its normal activities.
There are mainly two type of Interrupts in operating system:
•

Software interrupts: Caused by software itself which is usually a program code in the user space. Software
interrupts are typically called Traps or Exceptions.

•

Hardware interrupts: An electronic signal created and sent to the processor by performing some actions by
the hardware components are known as Hardware interrupts.

3. Program Execution: OS provides an interface between application software and hardware components. Program
execution is the process by which a computer executes the instructions of a computer program.
4. Memory management: It is the process of controlling and handling the primary memory. It is the process of
partitioning the memory into small blocks and assign these blocks to a running process to optimize the overall system
performance.
All the programs must be loaded into the main memory (RAM) for its execution. Sometimes the whole program is
loaded into the RAM while sometimes a part of the program is loaded when called by the program and this process is
known as Dynamic Loading.
Sometimes a running program need another program that is not present in the main memory. So instead, of loading
all the related programs in the main memory, processor links the related programs to the executing program in the
main memory, this process is known as Dynamic Linking.
5. Disk access and file management: The systematic way in which the data is stored in available storage space is
called File system. File system is the process in which the files are named properly and stored logically in the disk for
easy storage and fast retrieval.
6. Device drivers: Hardware devices need a program to communicate with the OS of the computer system. A
computer program with which the hardware devices such as printer can communicate with the kernel of computer
system are known as Driver or Device driver.

www.oliveboard.in

www.oliveboard.in

The device drivers can be broadly categorized into three groups:
•

Character driver: Deals with the character devices that communicate by sending and receiving
single characters.

•

Block driver: Deals with the devices in that communicates by sending and receiving entire block of data.

•

Network driver: The network driver allows us to connect to an external network by sending and receiving
data packets.

7. User interface: A user interface is that part of operating system by which a user interacts with the computer
system and provides platform for Human – computer interaction. There are different types of user interfaces:
•

Command line interface (CLI) or Character user interface (CUI): It is the oldest user interface, which is
a text-based user interface which involves the commands types by the user and respond of computer based
on those commands. Ex: Disk operating system (DOS).

•

Graphical user interface (GUI): GUI is the most attractive way of interaction between user and computer.
It deals with the graphical images, icons and it allows users to interact with the machine by those images,
icons and visual indicators. Ex: Windows and Android.

•

Menu driven interface (MDI): A menu driven interface is the simplest and easiest way to communicate
with the computer system. It deals with the series of screens (menus) where user has to choose one option
what to do next out of available options in the menu. Ex: Cash machines (ATM), ticket booking machine and
information kiosk.

Functions of Operating System: Following are some functions of operating system:
1. Booting: Booting is the start-up sequence of operating system and boot process loads the operating system
into main memory of the computer system.
2. Loading and execution of program: A program resides in the secondary memory must be loaded in the
main memory of computer for execution.
3. Security: Security refers to integrity, confidentiality and availability of data which of provided by Operating
system.
4. Control over system performance: Operating system has complete control over computer system so as to
improve the performance of the system.
5. Job accounting: The operating system keeps track of time and resources used by a process and maintain
this information in a log record.
6. Acts as an interface between software and user: It coordinate between software and user and assigns
software such as assembler, interpreter, compiler and other software whenever user need them.
Some other major important functions of Operating System:
•

Process management

•

Memory management

•

File management

•

I/O device management

Program: A computer program is lines of codes or collection of instructions that performs a specific task when
executed. A process is a program in execution, any program written by programmer reside in the hard disk or
secondary storage of a computer. A processor can execute programs in the main memory, so a program must bring
into main memory from secondary storage.
A process in main memory can be divided into four sections:
•

Stack: A process stack contains temporary data such as functions/methods parameters, return
value/address, local variables etc.

•

Heap: Heap is an area of main memory that is assigned dynamically at the runtime of process to store
temporary variables and data.

www.oliveboard.in

